---
layout: post
permalink: blog/blog31/
categories: [Extra]
---

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2600/1*E3QpF5fT_W-F1xu-xM6Sdw.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">(Source:
[https://www.iwsinc.com/events/2019/mobile-world-congress-americas-in-los-angeles-october-22-29-2019/](https://www.iwsinc.com/events/2019/mobile-world-congress-americas-in-los-angeles-october-22-29-2019/))</span>

# Mobile World Congress 2019: The Latest AI Advancements

## A review of some of the latest AI advancements from the 2019 Los Angeles Mobile World Congress.

### Introduction

This October, I had the opportunity to attend the Mobile World Congress 2019 in
Los Angeles. In this article, I will provide an overview of some of the latest
AI announcements and how the 5G network is going to be used in order to empower
AI-powered applications.

### 5G AI-Powered Applications

#### NVIDIA EGX

One of the most important announcements made by NVIDIA at the Mobile World
Congress is [EGX (Edge Computing
Platform)](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/products/egx-edge-computing/).
EGX is a high-performance, cloud-native platform designed to let companies
rapidly stream data from remote locations at low latency. Many companies have
already decided to make use of this platform, some examples are: Walmart,
Samsung and BMW.

> “We’ve entered a new era, where billions of always-on IoT sensors will be
> connected by 5G and processed by AI”

> — Jensen Huang, NVIDIA CEO

EGX was made possible thanks to the combination of three main technologies:
Artificial Intelligence, the Internet of Things and 5G.

* **Internet of Things:** Smart devices are nowadays becoming more and more
common. IoT is commonly used by industries to harness data remotely and make
smart decisions using the gathered information. One of the main problems of
using IoT devices in industrial applications has always been the need to fast
capture, process and transmit data in real-time. If any of these 3 requirements
can’t be met, then our IoT devices would not be able to quickly respond to
changes in the environment and report anomalies back to the Cloud. If you are
interested in finding out more in details about how IoT devices works,
additional information are available
[here](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/introduction-to-iot-internet-of-things/).
* **Artificial Intelligence:** AI is used in IoT devices to process the gathered
data. The captured data can be of many different forms depending on the
applications. Some examples are: time series data, camera recording and anomaly
detection. In IoT applications, it then becomes really important to make the
best use of memory and processing power needed to run our AI models. Therefore,
depending on the application, it can be possible to perform our AI data
processing either locally (if there are privacy-related concerns) or on the
Cloud (enabling us to make use of more advanced AI models).
* **5G:** Finally, 5G can now enable us to consistently speed up the communication
between our IoT devices and the Cloud. This can, therefore, enable us to run
more sophisticated applications on the Cloud such as online gaming and
Augmented/Virtual reality powered applications.

One of the application examples provided by NVIDIA at the Mobile World Congress
was Smart Retail (Figure 1). In this example, a network of cameras is used to
keep track in real-time of which items a customer picks to buy while shopping,
consistently speeding up customer retail experience.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2000/1*-ZqgPImuQ8qvkchXUs7mcg.jpeg) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 1: NVIDIA Smart Retail [1]</span>

Additionally, NVIDIA also announced a new collaboration with Microsoft for
intelligent edge computing by integrating Microsoft Azure services with NVIDIA
EGX (Figure 2).

> “Together with NVIDIA, we’re bringing the power of Azure and Azure AI to the
> edge, enabling breakthrough experiences for our customers.”

> — Satya Nadella, Microsoft CEO

If you are interested in finding out more about Microsoft AI-powered tools, more
information are available [here](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/ai/).

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2600/1*WKO5-MwVi3B-js4pTsF00Q.jpeg) <br>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Figure 2: NVIDIA CEO Jensen Huang 2019 Keynote</span>

#### Virtual Reality Data Visualization

[Data
Visualization](https://towardsdatascience.com/interactive-data-visualization-167ae26016e8)
is a really important step to perform when analyzing vast amounts of data. Some
of the main benefits of performing data visualization are:

* It can help us to gain a deep understanding of the dynamics underlying our data
distribution.
* Having a deep understanding of our data can help us building better Machine
Learning models.
* Creating charts summaries can make easier for others to understand our data
investigation.

At the mobile world congress, different companies launched Virtual Reality (VR)
powered Data Visualization tools (eg.
[Virtualitics](https://www.virtualitics.com/) and [BadVR](https://badvr.com/)).
In fact, thanks to 5G, it will now be easier to even live stream heavy data VR
applications.

Virtual Reality creates a completely artificial environment in which the user
gets fully immersed. Using VR to visualize datasets could potentially lead to
enhanced customer experience and a better understanding of dataset features
(especially for medical applications such as protein folding).

In particular, Virtualitics can also be integrated with Jupyter Notebooks using
their Python API (as shown in the video below), making possible for everyone to
create AR Data Visualization charts.

<div>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Hf6TlLfjZRA" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
<span class="figcaption_hack">Video 1: Virtualitics Python API [2] </span>
<br><br>

If you are looking for an introduction on AR/VR programming, you can find more
information about it in [this my previous
article](https://towardsdatascience.com/getting-started-with-augmented-and-virtual-reality-a51446661c3).

*****

*I hope you enjoyed this article, thank you for reading!*

### Bibliography

[1] TechRepublic, NVIDIA’s smart retail experience — Macy Bayern. Accessed at:
[https://www.techrepublic.com/pictures/photos-everything-cool-at-mwc19-los-angeles/15/](https://www.techrepublic.com/pictures/photos-everything-cool-at-mwc19-los-angeles/15/)

[2] Virtualitics — Python API, VirtualiticsVR. Accessed at:
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hf6TlLfjZRA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hf6TlLfjZRA)
